---
title: "HCI Blog revision One"
date: 2021-02-19
draft: true
---
# Blog One: Revision One (449)

You might not think of Starbucks as a place where computers are used heavily in the day to day operations. Computers and the way in which the baristas making your morning coffee interact with them is probably the last thing on your mind. These days the Baristas are using computers in every position behind the bar. Gone are the days of making espresso manually. 

Before I get into the details of the interaction I had with computers at Starbucks, I think its important to give a quick rundown on how espresso is made manually. First the barista grinds the coffee into a portafilter and tamps it down into a small puck. Then the portafilter is locked into the espresso machine and a switch is pressed that showers the puck of coffee with water. At this point if everything was done properly there should be about 9 bars of pressure on the coffee grounds, and after about 20-24 seconds you will extract about 2 ounces of super concentrated coffee. In this process there is surprisingly little interaction with a computer, perhaps there is a temperature gauge that lets you know when the machine is sufficiently hot, but other than that there is very little feedback other than the quality of the espresso you extract. This is how most coffee shops make espresso today, Starbucks on the other hand has automated much of the process. This is not to say that Starbucks coffee is bad, in fact I would say that given the volume of coffee they make, it is actually quite good

Once upon a time Starbucks made espresso just like I explained above, but sometime in the early 2000's they started to become incredibly popular and stores started popping up on every corner. Due to new demand the manual method of making espresso was too time consuming, so they switched the espresso machines to one known as the Mastrena (pictured below), which is a super automatic machine.

The Mastrenas abstract away a lot of the process for the baristas, so much so that I think most baristas today probably don't have any idea how to make coffee with a traditional espresso machine. The process of grinding, tamping and locking in the portafilter is now hidden behind one button press.  starbucks baristas are greeted with a row of buttons that allow them to pull shots in either, regular, decaf, or half-caf in sets of 2 shots (all espresso machines can only pull two shots at any given time, so to pull 4 shots you pull two sets of two shots). From a business perspective this is awesome for Starbucks, the process of pulling shots from start to finish is now cut in half, allowing baristas to serve more customers in a shorter period of time. Plus the amount of time it takes to train a barista is significantly cut down.

The Mastrenas biggest strength is that it is all one self contained unit, however this is also its biggest flaw. When one part of the machine breaks often you have to stop using the whole thing. For example, lets say the grinder breaks, you cant just swap out the grinder and keep using the rest of the machine, instead the whole thing stops working leaving you making drinks with one espresso machine. At Starbucks working with strictly one machine can ruin the whole morning, as your output is cut at least in half. With two machines you can pull 4 shots in approximately 20 seconds (both Mastrenas pulling two shots each in 20 seconds), but with one machine you cant pull the second two shots until the first two are done totaling about 40 seconds. Starbucks expects drinks to be made in under one minute each, so with 40 seconds of dead time you're cutting it close and drinks are starting to pile up on you. You might be thinking well how often does the grinder break surely this cant be that big of a problem? Well true, the grinder doesn't break very often but on these self contained units if almost anything breaks then you're left with no recourse but to stop using it, call the repair man and hope that he comes before the next big rush.

When I worked at Starbucks the machines  would break probably about once every two weeks, and it wasn't always as serious of a problem as a broken grinder. For example, there was a sensor that would detect if the grounds drawer is full and tell you its time to empty it. So of course you would slide the tray out, empty the grounds into the trash and slide the tray back in. Often times however the sensor would not detect that the tray was back in its slot, so you would sit there sliding the tray in and out over and over again until the sensor worked. If that sensor never worked, guess what? You cant pull shots anymore from that machine.

Other times the problems were due to user error. The machines are designed to be run through a cleaning cycle three times a day. Of course sometimes shift leads would forget to delegate this task, leading to a complete machine shut down. You could be in the middle of making drinks during a rush and with no signifier the machine would stop working and demand to be cleaned. At least if there had been some kind of warning you could adjust your flow and move to the secondary machine.

Further there was very little troubleshooting we could do. If anything went wrong on the machines standard was to just stop using it and wait. The shift lead would call in a work order and then we would wait for the repair man. Hopefully that repair man would come withing 24 hours but often it was longer. The Mastrenas were truly a black box, where we had very little knowledge of its inner workings.

I stopped working at Starbucks about two years ago, and since they have changed to a new style of Mastrena. I hope they've fixed some of the problems with the new ones, because I don't miss those mornings with customers staring me down wondering why their coffee is taking 5 minutes instead of one.